# microplastic-waste-project
A datasci / statistic project that investigates the correlation between microplastic ingestion rates (via seafood) and a country's proportion of plastic waste.

### Abstract
Microplastic ingestion is a major health concern, as microplastics can mimic human hormones, increasing risk
of fetal developmental issues and cancer (Gonzalez, 2024). We hypothesize countries with higher proportions
of plastic waste to have higher rates of ingestion of microplastics. We approximate human ingestion of
microplastics through seafood in coastal countries with the average microplastic concentrations found in their
adjacent oceans. We create two linear models—one directly relating microplastic concentrations to plastic
waste emitted, and one which additionally considers country GDP—neither of which ultimately achieve
statistical significance. In the future, we hope to add average ocean current velocity to our model, as we
believe this would explain a great amount of the variation in microplastic concentration.

## Introduction
Microplastics are plastic particles that are less than 5mm in length, and have been identified in our atmospheric,
aquatic, and terrestrial environments, as well as in drinking water and food products (Senathirajah, 2021).
Chemicals in microplastics can mimic human hormones such as BPA and PFAS (Gonzalez, 2024), and
exposure to these substances has been shown to increase the risk of conditions ranging from infertility to
poorer fetal development and cancer. Seafood is one possible vector of exposure to microplastics, and it’s
been estimated that up to 50,000 microplastic particles are ingested annually by adults through seafood
(Nicole, 2021). To address this issue, our research question is:
Do countries that have higher plastic waste have higher ingestion of microplastics?
We will approximate human ingestion of microplastics through seafood with the microplastic concentrations
found in the oceans near the countries of interest. Then, we will build a linear model to determine whether
there is a relationship between the plastic waste generated by a country and the associated microplastics found
in nearby water sources. The results of our descriptive analysis will inform governments of the importance of
reducing plastic waste to reduce microplastic consumption and improve public health.

## Data
To get data on microplastic concentrations per region, we pulled data from the National Centers for
Environmental Information. The dataset includes the associated ocean, region, sampling method, measurement,
measurement units, latitude, longitude, as well the research group that collected the data. To find associated
plastic waste per country in tons, we pulled data from Our World in Data, which has plastic waste emitted
per country to the ocean, for the year 2019. To find associated Gross Domestic Product per country in US
dollars, we pulled data from World Bank Group reports for the year 2019.
The microplastic data only has latitude, longitude, and the associated ocean region (like the Indian Ocean.)
In order to join the two datasets by country, we used the rnaturalearth library to identify the closest country
by distance, and we validated the points visually and by mapping the points with R. One issue with this
association is that this does not take into account ocean current movements, as plastic located close to a
country does not necessarily mean it came from that country.

## Results

Three models were created, none of which had a statistically significant p-value. Of them, models 2 and 3 performed the best:

For model 2, log10(microplastic) = β0 + β1log10(plastic_waste), the interpretation of our slope would have
been that the microplastic number density off the coast of a country is exponentially related to that country’s
plastic waste emitted, with the power of the exponent being the our slope. However, the p-value for the slope
is 0.06 which is slightly above the threshold value. This suggests weak evidence that the waste emitted by
a country impacts the amount of microplastics found in their nearby ocean, so our model 2 slope has no
practical interpretation. The model 2 R squared value is only 0.072 indicating that there are more variables
we should be looking at to explain microplastic correlation.

For model 3, log10(microplastic) = β0 + β1log10(plastic_waste) + β2log10(GDP), the p-value for the slope
is 0.18 for GDP which indicates that this relationship is not statistically significant. The same follows for
emitted waste with a p-value of 0.29. This suggests weak evidence that the waste emitted by country and
GDP impacts the amount of microplastics found in the ocean, so our model 3 has no practical interpretation.
The model 3 R squared value is only 0.094 indicating that there are more predictors to assess to explain
microplastic correlation. 

Although our model 2 came close to the required threshold, ultimately none of our models were statistically
significant, indicating that there are more variables we needed to look at to explain microplastic concentration.
In the future, we hope to look into adding average ocean current speed to our model, as we believe that this
would have a major impact on the distribution of microplastic particles.
